Bernie Sanders staffs up for 2020

Bernie Sanders is adding firepower to his political team ahead of a potential 2020 campaign, locking down digital alumni who were key to his surprise performance in 2016 and recruiting the media production company that helped launch Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez to prominence.

The flurry of activity, detailed by four people familiar with the campaign’s thinking, is the latest sign that the Vermont senator is closing in on a decision on a second run for the White House.

Means of Production, the filmmaking cooperative that created the viral campaign video that propelled Ocasio-Cortez’s House campaign, is in talks with the Sanders team about a major role in 2020. And two people who powered Sanders’ record-breaking small-dollar fundraising operation in 2016 have agreed to join a subsequent presidential bid if it materializes, according to a Sanders campaign aide: Tim Tagaris and Robin Curran, his digital fundraising director and digital production director in 2016, respectively.

The aide said another pair that have helped Sanders build a digital media juggernaut out of his Senate office — media producer Armand Aviram and digital director Georgia Parke — are likely to be part of his 2020 team, too.

The behind-the-scenes moves underscore one of Sanders’ key strengths: He is poised to enter the Democratic primary field with a digital operation and social media army that outpaces virtually any other candidate, at least for now. For all the attention on Beto O’Rourke’s online dominance last year, only Sanders would start the campaign on the foundation of a full-fledged, grassroots presidential campaign.
COUNTDOWN TO 2020

The race for 2020 starts now. Stay in the know. Follow our presidential election coverage.
Email

By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

The steps also suggest that Sanders has every intention of trying to reactivate the army of liberal activists he amassed two years ago, undergirded by an unapologetic Democratic socialist message backed by a state-of-the-art fundraising and digital infrastructure.

“Sen. Sanders maintains an organic and very expansive social media following that really only he has” among possible 2020 contenders, said David Duhalde, political director of Sanders-founded Our Revolution. “He has a significant advantage.”

Naomi Burton and Nick Hayes, activists in the Democratic Socialists of America who left a global public relations agency and commercial production freelancing to launch Means of Production, rocketed into the national spotlight last year when they produced the hit ad highlighting Ocasio-Cortez’s working-class roots and left-wing policies. It received 300,000 views in a day and eventually racked up nearly 4.6 million views on Twitter and YouTube.

“They’ve proven that they’re on the cutting-edge of popularizing progressive populist and democratic socialist politics in America,” said Waleed Shahid, a spokesman for Justice Democrats, the progressive political action committee that recruited Ocasio-Cortez.

Burton said the Detroit-based team would likely create “big, beautiful ads” and “drumbeat content” for Sanders if it was brought on for 2020.

"We have certainly been talking with his team," she said, adding that if Sanders runs, "He's the only candidate we would work for.”
Former Housing and Urban Development Secretary Julián Castro announces his candidacy for president.

2020 Elections
‘They heard the message’: Castro makes play for the Obama coalition

By NOLAN D. MCCASKILL

Tagaris, a member of Sanders’ inner circle who was expected to be part of any 2020 campaign, is known as a trailblazer in small-dollar fundraising. Now the owner of Aisle 518 Strategies, he has been running Sanders’ email program and digital advertising. Curran, in addition to working on Sanders’ 2016 campaign, was the Democratic National Committee's email director during the 2018 midterm cycle.

Asked about their future roles, Tagaris confirmed that, along with him and Curran, who is now vice president of digital strategy at Aisle 518 Strategies, his firm’s Hal Irish and Saron Olkaba have also pledged to be part of any 2020 Sanders campaign.

Curran’s allies said she transformed the DNC’s email program, which critics considered almost beyond repair, during her time there.

Aviram, a former producer for the millennial-focused media company NowThis News, and other Senate staffers have posted more than 1,000 videos on Sanders’ Facebook and Twitter pages over the past two years, on everything from labor strikes to climate change to the government shutdown. They’ve allowed Sanders to bypass traditional media and, when it comes to audience size, sometimes surpass it.

This week, Sanders’ Senate team streamed his rebuttal to President Donald Trump’s Oval Office address on Facebook, Twitter and YouTube, which went on to garner more than 1.1 million views. In comparison, former Texas Rep. O’Rourke, who is also considering a presidential bid, received almost 200,000 views when he filmed himself on Facebook Live for more than an-hour-and-a-half to refute Trump; a short clip of the video got another 480,000 views on Twitter.

CrowdTangle data recently compiled by a person close to the Sanders campaign also underscores his social media muscle compared with other presidential hopefuls: Sanders’ videos had nearly 1.5 billion views in 2017 and 2018 on Facebook — almost three times more than all other potential 2020 Democratic candidates’ videos combined, according to the report. He also outpaced other possible contenders in Facebook interactions.

Still, other presidential aspirants are building up their digital teams, too, and could ramp them up to overcome Sanders. Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D-Mass.) has waxed about her policy stances and affinity for beer on Instagram Live since announcing her exploratory committee. O’Rourke has proven to be a social media sensation: One video he posted at the end of last year slamming Trump’s proposal for a border wall had more than 5.4 million views.
Sen. Elizabeth Warren speaks during a New Hampshire organizing event.

2020 Elections
Warren calls for 'systemic change' in first New Hampshire swing

By STEPHANIE MURRAY

Critically, some key Sanders alumni have defected to O’Rourke: According to the New York Times, Middle Seat, a digital firm created by former Sanders staffers, is "hoping" to be part of an O’Rourke 2020 campaign. Other former employees not working on the digital staff have joined Warren’s operation or otherwise signaled they are looking at different campaigns.

The defections highlight how drastically different a primary race Sanders would face this time, with potentially dozens of candidates including several others competing for a lane he had to himself in 2016.

Meanwhile, other major changes are underway in Sanders' inner circle. Last week, CNN reported his 2016 campaign manager, Jeff Weaver, would not return to a 2020 campaign in that role, instead serving as a senior adviser.

Sanders, 77, has not decided whether to run for president a second time. In recent weeks, he has come under fire over reports detailing sexual harassment by male staffers on his 2016 campaign, as well as an alleged pay disparity between male and female aides. Sanders has apologized to the women who said they were harassed and promised that his 2018 Senate campaign implemented new guidelines to prevent sexual misconduct.

“To the women in our campaign who were harassed or mistreated, I apologize,” Sanders said last week. “Our standards, our procedures, our safeguards, were clearly inadequate.”

Sanders has said he will “probably run” for president if he believes he is the best candidate to defeat Trump.

Whoever the eventual Democratic nominee is, that person will need to be able to compete on social media with Trump, who, like Sanders, has used Twitter to bypass mainstream media.

On Saturday, the People for Bernie Sanders hosted more than 400 house parties throughout the country to push Sanders to run in 2020.

Winnie Wong, a co-founder of the group, said the events showed that outside pro-Sanders organizations also have extensive social media power that can be put to use in a presidential election.

“Sanders’ grassroots social media machine is very much driving these house parties,” she said. “We are able to organize without any formal organizing plan in place.”
How Detroit filmmakers helped a socialist unseat a New York lawmaker

When 28-year-old socialist Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez triumphed over Democratic big-wig Joe Crowley in New York’s 14th congressional district on Tuesday, Detroit filmmakers Nick Hayes and Naomi Burton celebrated.

Tweeting from the account of Means of Production, their collaborative production company, Hayes and Burton wrote that “when candidates on the left present their message clearly and unapologetically, they can win. Means of Production is proud to carry that message, and we’re just getting started.”

Of course, they had reason to feel proud – they had filmed the viral campaign video that helped propel Ocasio-Cortez to national stardom.

Means of Production, Hayes said, is “a democratically organized leftist production cooperative. The goal is to empower and reflect the working class through an effective left media structure.”

Means of Production is exclusive about who it provides services for: “unions, the working class, progressive candidates and certain nonprofits,” Hayes told the Free Press.

Also on freep.com:

Protesters in Detroit denounce Trump travel ban, call for action

Who's running for Congress in Michigan? Here's what we know

Hayes and Burton both worked in communications and production, filming advertisements for large corporations. After the 2016 elections, they became more involved with the Democratic Socialists of America (DSA), which has reported an increase in membership of more than 500 percent in 2017.

As they engaged with political issues from new and more radical perspectives, Hayes and Burton struggled with the way their professional life clashed with their values. “We realized we were essentially aiding in the dissemination of corporate propaganda,” Hayes said.

Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, a political newcomer who upset 10-term incumbent Joe Crowley in the New York congressional Democrat primary, says "last night was a surprise." (June 27) AP

They left their previous jobs to form Means of Production, with the intent that it would be more accessible to working class people and progressive candidates, whose coffers might not be as full as corporate-sponsored politicians.

Usually, production is “so wildly expensive that only corporations can afford it,” Burton said. Means of Production lowers prices through refusing to overcharge.

“We’re not just blatantly ripping people off,” Hayes said. They use smaller crews and fewer resources to accomplish things more efficiently. “We pay people fairly but use low-cost production models,” he explained.

Their politics also help them produce cheaply. “We work with candidates and issues that we’re ideologically aligned with,” Burton said. “It takes a lot less people to develop a script when we know the policy and politics that they’re coming from.”

That’s how Means of Production produced the viral Ocasio-Cortez ad, which had more than 2.83 million views at press time. It was, Hayes said, “A very small footprint production. It was just Naomi and myself shooting it and a couple of campaign volunteers.”

Since the video went viral, Hayes and Burton have been contacted by candidates at all levels, from those running for federal office to people in municipal elections. One of their most recent clients is Katie Scott, who is running for the Washtenaw County Board of Commissioners. Hayes said that Scott is “running as a progressive, working-class champion. She’s the real deal in Washtenaw County.”

People like Scott and Ocasio-Cortez are at the front of a groundswell of left-wing Democrats challenging establishment politicians across the country, Hayes and Burton said.

“Alexandria is just one of many,” Burton told the Free Press. “We just want all the Democrats who take corporate money and who have profited off of the working class and the oppressed for so long to know that there’s a new wave of Democrats coming to take their seats – and we are behind them and supporting them.”

Also on freep.com:

Detroit residents can get nonviolent records expunged on Saturday

Lawrence: Shocking conditions at immigrant detention centers in Texas

That goes for Detroit as well. “Detroit is a town run by Democrats,” Burton added. “But who are they working for? Corporations have bought off all of the Democrats here and it’s time for a change.”

Means of Production hopes to help facilitate that change by making high-quality communications, outreach, and productions accessible to progressives running on small-donation campaigns. “There are a lot of people to support who have been doing the work for a long time who have been shut out of these important communication tools,” Burton said. “We’re here to change that.”
Viral Videos Are Replacing Pricey Political Ads. They’re Cheaper, and They Work.


These are not the stories that candidates usually turn to the camera and open up about in ads.

One talked about her father’s violent temper and how she once watched him throw her mother through a plate glass door. Another recalled watching his brothers struggle to find steady work because of their criminal records. A third spoke of suffering a decade of sexual abuse as a child.

The wave of female, minority and outsider candidates that is breaking cultural barriers and toppling incumbents in the Democratic Party is also sweeping aside a longstanding norm in campaigns: That the public image of politicians — especially women — should be upbeat, uncontroversial and utterly conventional.

For many of these Democrats who were running against better-financed rivals, the breakthrough moment came after they got personal in relatively low-cost videos that went viral, reaching millions of people. Using documentary-style storytelling, which can last for several minutes, candidates have found a successful alternative to the traditional model of raising huge sums of money that get spent on expensive, 30-second television commercials.

The videos are chiefly intended as ads, but they also served a fund-raising purpose. For a fraction of the cost, these videos can help to spread a candidate’s story in a way that is easily shareable and can inspire donations.

Jahana Hayes, a Connecticut educator and first-time candidate who won a primary for Congress last month, produced a video for less than $20,000 that brought in $300,000 in donations. In it, she described the difficult circumstances of her upbringing — being raised by her grandmother while her mother battled addiction and then getting pregnant at 17.

In the housing project where she was raised, says Ms. Hayes, who was named National Teacher of the Year in 2016, “people are strong, but they aren’t supposed to run for Congress.”

“If Congress starts to look like us, no one can stop us,” she says.

Republican candidates this year have been using their own personal, sometimes primal, approach — though with far different messages and audiences in mind. They have largely stuck to the 30-second commercial format rather than the narrative videos, however.

“I believe in God, family and country. In that order,” said Brian Kemp, who won his party’s nomination for governor in Georgia after running a series of provocative ads that gained national notoriety. In one, called “Offends,” he boasts of unapologetically standing for the national anthem, saying Merry Christmas and supporting “ironclad borders.” If that doesn’t interest you, he says, “Then I’m not your guy.”
Editors’ Picks
Does This Dress Make Me Look Guilty?
The Secret History of the Jews From Shanghai
The Racial Bias Built Into Photography
Brian Kemp, the Republican nominee for governor in Georgia, appeared in a campaign ad while cocking a gun at a young man who is dating his daughter.CreditKemp for Governor
Image
Brian Kemp, the Republican nominee for governor in Georgia, appeared in a campaign ad while cocking a gun at a young man who is dating his daughter.CreditKemp for Governor

Another of Mr. Kemp’s ads shows him polishing and cocking a shotgun as a young man dating his daughter sits nervously to his side ticking off the list of campaign promises Mr. Kemp intends to fulfill. The firm that produced it, Something Else, in Northern Virginia, also made a viral ad for the Republican nominee for governor in Florida, Ron DeSantis, in which Mr. DeSantis’ children are shown paying homage to President Trump — one builds a wall out of play blocks, the other wears a onesie with the “Make America Great Again” slogan on it.

If the Republicans are appealing overtly to Trump supporters and conservatives, many Democrats are trying to telegraph a sense of shared struggle and life experience, while making the explicit assertion that a government cannot adequately represent the people it is supposed to serve unless its servants look like and live among the people.

Ayanna Pressley, whose primary victory over a 10-term Democratic congressman in the Boston area was the latest manifestation of the disruptive energy in the party’s progressive wing, helped raise her profile in Boston with a two-minute online video, called “The 1 Bus,” that showed her riding a city bus through her district. She narrates as the landscape outside changes from stately brick homes to blighted, vacant storefronts.

“I have stayed, on purpose, in close proximity to the hurt, acutely uncomfortable so that I’ll never grow complacent in tackling these inequities,” she says.
Sign Up for On Politics With Lisa Lerer

A spotlight on the people reshaping our politics. A conversation with voters across the country. And a guiding hand through the endless news cycle, telling you what you really need to know.
Ayanna Pressley made a two-minute video called “The 1 Bus.”CreditAyanna Pressley
Image
Ayanna Pressley made a two-minute video called “The 1 Bus.”CreditAyanna Pressley

Ms. Pressley’s campaign, which also produced an earlier video of her describing how she suffered  childhood sexual abuse and a campus sexual assault, had the bus video translated into Spanish, Chinese and Haitian Creole and largely spread its messages through social media. The only television ads the campaign paid for were on Spanish-language television.

“We knew we would be outraised and outspent, without a doubt,” said Sarah Groh, Ms. Pressley’s campaign manager. “So when it was a question of how do we deploy our resources we looked at where our voters were consuming their information. Social media is a big part of that. And I know we definitely got a bump with each of those videos.”

In one video for Stacey Abrams, the Democratic nominee for governor of Georgia, she describes growing up at times without health insurance and watching her parents work full-time jobs but still struggle to pay off student loans. “My story is not unique,” she says in the video, which was posted to Facebook.

Andrew Gillum, the Democratic nominee for governor of Florida, narrated a series of videos that were shared tens of thousands of times online in which he talked about becoming governor “for anyone who’s ever been told that they don’t belong.” In one video he tells a story of his mother opening the front door to see a police officer there because one of his brothers — all of whom had criminal records — was in trouble again.
Andrew Gillum, the Democratic candidate for governor in Florida, appeared in a video called “Bring It Home.”CreditAndrew Gillum for Governor
Image
Andrew Gillum, the Democratic candidate for governor in Florida, appeared in a video called “Bring It Home.”CreditAndrew Gillum for Governor

“I remember making the promise to myself that I wasn’t going to make my mom cry like that,” Mr. Gillum says. “She was going to cry because she was happy.”

Strategists say that messages of empowerment are especially potent today because many voters on the left are eager to see more women, minorities, young people and outsiders in government positions.

“People are broadening their definitions of what political leaders can look like,” said Teddy Goff, a co-founder of the agency Precision Strategies, a Democratic consulting firm, and President Barack Obama’s former digital director. “A political leader,” he added, “can be a 17-year-old from Parkland, Fla., or a 28-year-old who was a bartender until last year.”

The candidates who have upset the Democratic field this year come with a diversity of life experience that includes losing children to gun violence, undergoing gender reassignment surgery and escaping war-torn nations.
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez appeared in a campaign video called “The Courage to Change.” The video, posted in May, was one of Ms. Ocasio-Cortez’s most popular political tools.CreditAlexandria Ocasio-Cortez
Image
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez appeared in a campaign video called “The Courage to Change.” The video, posted in May, was one of Ms. Ocasio-Cortez’s most popular political tools.CreditAlexandria Ocasio-Cortez

The use of viral videos by first-time candidates to challenge assumptions around who should run for office was used early on by Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, the 28-year-old New Yorker who upset a powerful incumbent congressman in a Democratic primary this summer. It was one of the first races in this election season to signal the disconnect many liberals feel from their leaders.

“Women like me aren’t supposed to run for office,” Ms. Ocasio-Cortez, a former bartender, says in the opening of one of her most popular videos, “The Courage to Change,” which depicts her in settings that people from New York would find familiar: on a subway platform changing from flats into a pair of heels; eating dinner on the couch; picking up items in a bodega.
Naomi Burton and Nick Hayes, the duo behind Means of Production, work from their office in Detroit, Mich., in August.CreditEmily Rose Bennett for The New York Times
Image
Naomi Burton and Nick Hayes, the duo behind Means of Production, work from their office in Detroit, Mich., in August.CreditEmily Rose Bennett for The New York Times

Ms. Ocasio-Cortez’s video came out of a three-person firm called Means of Production in Detroit. Its producers were galvanized by frustration at Democrats after the 2016 election and wanted to shift their know-how in advertising and public relations into creating “propaganda for the working class,” said Nick Hayes, 21, one of the firm’s founders. Mr. Hayes was producing ads for carmakers and foam cup sellers before he met Naomi Burton, 29, at their local Democratic Socialists of America meeting. They founded the company together.

M. J. Hegar, a Democratic congressional candidate in Texas, has garnered millions of views for her three-and-a-half minute video, “Doors,” in which she describes fighting wildfires in California, being awarded a Purple Heart, suing the Pentagon over its ban on women in ground combat and watching her father toss her mother through a glass door. The video, produced by Putnam Partners in Washington and set to a Rolling Stones-like soundtrack, feels like a short biographical film.

It was expensive to produce at $50,000, but ended up being a fantastic gamble. It helped her campaign raise $1 million as viewers were drawn to her heroism and a compelling depiction of someone “who bumped up against the system and changed it for the better,” said Cayce McCabe, a senior vice president at Putnam Partners.
MJ Hegar, a Democratic candidate for Congress in Texas, showed her tattoo in a highly personal campaign ad called “Covered.”CreditMJ Hegar for Texas
Image
MJ Hegar, a Democratic candidate for Congress in Texas, showed her tattoo in a highly personal campaign ad called “Covered.”CreditMJ Hegar for Texas

People also took notice because Ms. Hegar did not look anything like the pearl-wearing politicians that play to part. In the opening shot of her and her family sitting down for a meal, the viewer sees a tattoo peeking out from under the sleeve on her right arm.

In her newest video, Ms. Hegar is shown inside a tattoo parlor. As she presents her arm to the camera and reveals a design with flowers and tree branches she explains why it’s there: It covers up the scars from the combat injuries she sustained as a helicopter pilot in Afghanistan.

“A lot of Democrats, for years, have been supporting and voting for candidates who didn’t always say exactly what they believed, didn’t always show their authentic, true selves,” said Mr. Goff, the Democratic consultant.

“To look around, not just at Trump, but at who’s been winning elections,” he said, “a lot of us have started to think: Why don’t we say what we mean?”
 Means of Production

“One day, a group of us were driving to a Democratic Socialists of America meeting, talking about our unbearable jobs working for one of the big three automakers,” says filmmaker Nick Hayes, 21. “As we talked, we realized that I created the ads, Naomi [Burton] created the social media and another person developed the product. We were the means of production. The idea stuck, and so did the notion that we’re contributing far greater to these corporations than what they led us to believe.”

Burton, 29, and Hayes, both Detroit-based, had met months earlier at a DSA meeting, where they dreamed of creating a better workplace–“an ideologically oriented, leftist production cooperative creating high-end affordable video,” says Hayes. “We would take the resources and expertise gleaned from the private world and bring it to the left at the same time as we were personally growing in our socialist ideology,” adds Burton.

Hayes jumped first, leaving the long hours of freelance film and commercial production to form the company. Shortly thereafter, in March 2018, Burton quit her corporate PR job and joined him. Looking to create ads for DSA candidates, the two reached out via Twitter to one newcomer challenging an entrenched Democratic incumbent in the upcoming midterm primary. Means of Production’s ideologically chiseled, disarmingly human ad for Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez dropped a month later, and its nearly one million viral views have helped launch the career of one of the left’s rising stars.

Says Hayes, “We worked hand in hand with the campaign for two weeks, learning their strategies, who their constituencies were, who [opponent] Joe Crowley was, and we talked to Alexandria quite a few times about her story and her priorities. We worked together to write the script and then she rewrote it in her own words. [Naomi and I] shot and edited it together–we were the only crew.”

Of the ad’s style, Burton says the filmmakers were “just trying to capture people in their environment,” but this is an exceptionally modest description of MoP’s approach. In their vérité-feeling spots (a second ad for DSA-endorsed Hawaii congressional candidate Kaniela Ing followed Ocasio-Cortez’s), the two deftly situate their subjects within the warm embrace of their neighborhoods even as these landscapes are also shown as ideological battlegrounds. As Ocasio-Cortez slips on her low heels on a subway platform to start her campaign day, a voiceover contrasts her with a candidate who lives in Washington, D.C., and doesn’t drink the local water. Icily imposing corporate skyscrapers illustrate unjust tax and investment policy. There’s an even more striking shot in Ing’s ad–the candidate swimming alone, at magic hour, in the ocean looking out on a wall of high rises. “We’re trying to lean into a style that feels familiar to people in order to explain something—socialism—that’s new to them,” says Hayes.

Means of Production, says Burton, “is booked up on electoral work through November” while also working on a new division: Means TV, “a Netflix for the left” with anticapitalist content. “I’m tired of shows about five dudes living in a house with 18 bedrooms that nobody can really afford,” Burton says. “Entertainment is politics, and we can create entertainment that is more impactful.” — SM
