Ocasio-Cortez, Hegar and the art of making your political ad feel like an uplifting movie

Even if you haven’t heard of Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and MJ Hegar, you’ve probably seen them.

The women, candidates for the U.S. House in New York and Texas after winning their Democratic primaries, star in a current crop of viral campaign videos that are captivating online viewers and, just maybe, redefining the form.

In “The Courage to Change,” Ocasio-Cortez narrates a capsule history of her life, recounting how she was born in the Bronx, worked as an educator, organizer and waitress and became a candidate because “every day gets harder for working families like mine to get by.” Created by the Detroit-based production cooperative Means of Production and composed of lyrical images of Ocasio-Cortez and her fellow New Yorkers going about their workaday lives, the two-minute video builds to a stirring finish, with a disarmingly candid moment of the candidate switching shoes on a subway platform intercut with shots of rousing speeches and inspired crowds.

Even more galvanizing is “Doors,” a 3½ -minute video in which Hegar, a former Air Force pilot, describes a near-fatal helicopter incident in Afghanistan, her childhood with an abusive father and fighting the Pentagon to secure ground combat positions for women. Clearly inspired by the work of Martin Scorsese, director Cayce McCabe seamlessly edits the video to resemble one continuous shot, as the chapters of Hegar’s life gracefully mesh and call back to one another while a deconstructed version of “Gimme Shelter” plays in the background.

As political spots, “The Courage to Change” and “Doors” effectively acquit their mission, which is to introduce two unknowns to their would-be constituents. As examples of how cinematic craft and production values infuse and inform contemporary political rhetoric, these short-subject documentaries exemplify visual storytelling at its most exquisite and economical.

[With blunt talk and compelling stories, viral videos are turning unknown female candidates into political sensations]

Between the two of them, “Doors” and “The Courage to Change” have been seen about 3 million times on YouTube, representing something of a watershed moment during this midterm season. But this is by no means the first time that campaign advertising has leveraged film language and communications technology so effectively. In 1960, crooner and movie star Frank Sinatra sang “High Hopes” in ads for John F. Kennedy. By 1964, the vernacular had gotten decidedly edgier when Lyndon Johnson’s presidential campaign produced “Daisy,” in which a little girl plucks the petals from a flower while counting to herself. As she reaches “ten,” she looks up, the frame freezes and the camera zooms in on her eye, culminating in an exploding mushroom cloud.

The one-minute ad, which tacitly accused Johnson’s opponent, Barry Goldwater, of being an irrational warmonger, was broadcast only once on NBC. Excoriated for going too far, the Johnson campaign quickly pulled the ad. Still, an estimated 50 million people had watched as a darling little girl in a meadow was symbolically annihilated by a nuclear bomb — and the number doubled when, under pressure, the Johnson campaign pulled the ad and all three networks reported on the controversy.

Goldwater is never mentioned by name in the “Daisy” ad; its creators understood the first rule of horror films, which is that the scariest monster is the one the audience concocts in their heads. A few years later, Robert F. Kennedy would enlist such filmmakers as Charles Guggenheim, Robert Drew, D.A. Pennebaker and John Frankenheimer to create ads for his 1968 presidential campaign, clips of which can be seen in the absorbing Netflix documentary series “Bobby Kennedy for President.” Using the cinema-verite style for which Pennebaker would become famous with the Bob Dylan documentary “Don’t Look Back,” the Kennedy of these ads was a rock star in his own right, captured at his most self-deprecating, candid and warm, whether he was charming a living room full of skeptical Indiana farm wives or speaking gently and respectfully to a group of schoolchildren about the scourges of nuclear war and environmental destruction.

For the ensuing half-century, candidates would attempt, with varying degrees of success, to speak the visual language of their moment. Sometimes they’ve had to be bilingual: Hillary Clinton’s presidential campaign announcement in 2007 straddled two visual cultures, evincing the lush, soft-focus production values of a Nancy Meyers rom-com but widely seen on YouTube, then a relatively new and untested platform.

It was Clinton’s opponent, Barack Obama, who would master that medium. Appropriately enough, Obama’s most memorable ad, Will.I.Am’s “Yes We Can” video, wasn’t an official campaign production but user-generated content. (Four years later, Herman Cain and Mitt Romney would have their own viral moments, not always for desirable reasons.) Donald Trump, for his part, barely needed campaign ads at all: Already known to an American public steeped in reality TV, he merely had to stage a rally for an all-too-willing press to show up, as much for entertainment value as hard news.

In advertising parlance, that’s called “earned media,” which means it’s free. And that’s the great value of such videos as “The Courage to Change” and “Doors” going viral: Rather than pay for expensive TV spots, Ocasio-Cortez and Hegar can let novelty and sheer artistry build the buzz. This is particularly crucial at the outset of their primary campaigns, when they have a chance to define themselves before their opponents are able to, and before super-PAC money floods the general election.

The one-minute scare spot might be an artifact of the past, but the multiplier effect is the same: Get people talking, in this case by understanding that today’s endlessly streaming, cinema-literate viewers are as likely to respond to formal excellence as substantive content. Ocasio-Cortez and Hegar have brilliantly harnessed political tradition and of-the-moment signifiers to create awareness, enthusiasm and momentum (Frank Sinatra, meet the Stones). Like the movies and pop culture icons they reference, “The Courage to Change” and “Doors” succeed, not just because of their subjects’ compelling personal stories, but because of masterful, you’ve-gotta-see-this execution. Even though these candidates are newcomers, they possess the instinct of the old pros who know that advertising can be artful — and certainly effective — but old-fashioned ballyhoo is priceless.
How a Ragtag Group of Socialist Filmmakers Produced One of the Most Viral Campaign Ads of 2018
Zaid Jilani

June 5 2018, 10:05 a.m.

Bronx activist and community organizer Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez is challenging longtime New York Democratic Rep. Joe Crowley in his primary on June 26. By all measures, the former Bernie Sanders organizer is an underdog, going up against the powerful chair of the House Democratic Caucus who has more than $1.6 million in cash on hand (Ocasio-Cortez has raised around $200,000).

But in a social media-focused campaign video released on May 30, Ocasio-Cortez sought to turn this money gap into a liability for Crowley — telling a story about her life and the lives of thousands of other working-class New Yorkers who continue to be squeezed by the high cost of health care, education, and housing.

“This race is about people versus money,” Ocasio-Cortez says in the ad. “We’ve got people. They’ve got money.”

Within a day, the video had over 300,000 views.

It’s not hard to see why. The video is tightly produced, crafting a narrative about an organizer-candidate who has the same sort of working-class background that is representative of the majority of New York’s 14th Congressional District — the median income in the district is $53,512 — taking on a powerful incumbent backed by Wall Street dollars.

What you may be surprised to find out is that the video was produced not by Hollywood video production veterans or high-dollar political consultants, but by a ragtag pair of socialists based in Detroit.

Last year, Detroit-based Democratic Socialists of America activists Naomi Burton and Nick Hayes formed Means of Production, a media production company that works exclusively for the working class. (DSA has since endorsed Ocasio-Cortez.)

Both were veterans of other communications firms and were troubled by the fact that many of these firms worked both for progressive candidates and corporations working against the very same causes.

“It just didn’t compute to us that the same people creating working-class propaganda are creating essentially propaganda for corporations,” Hayes said.

“We did this, really, with the goal of building kind of an effective, functional left media structure,” Burton explained.

She first reached out to the Ocasio-Cortez campaign in March, after she learned about the candidate on Facebook. “Her message was bold. It was unapologetic. It had a clear leftist vision that I could understand as just a normal person, that I thought other working people could identify with,” she explained. “And after doing a little bit of digging, I realized she didn’t have a campaign video.”

So she sent Ocasio-Cortez a Twitter direct message explaining how Means of Production could help the campaign. A month later, the team went to New York City, and a month after that, the video was released. Thus, in less than 2 1/2 months, a pair of socialist upstart filmmakers in Detroit conceived, produced, and released one of the most viral campaign videos of 2018.

Hayes was hesitant to disclose the campaign’s exact budget for the commercial, but told The Intercept that the entire project cost less than $10,000. Costs were kept low because virtually everyone in the ad was a community member, a volunteer, or a member of Ocasio-Cortez’s family. Much of the video was produced simply by following Ocasio-Cortez around during the campaign. The closing shot of the film is set in an apartment.

“A lot of the footage, like following … the person putting up campaign posters and things like that, that’s just people out doing work in the community for her, in the campaign,” Hayes said.

The success of the video shoot raises the question: Why do candidates spend so much money on high-priced consultants who produce boring, safe videos, when ideologically aligned, camera-savvy activists can do it quicker, cheaper, and with more vitality?

“For a lot of these political candidates, who have nothing to offer people … staging a whole thing and creating this whole kind of fake world is necessary because, you know, you’re working from nothing, you have nothing to work with,” Hayes said, crediting Ocasio-Cortez’s political vision with inspiring the themes of the video. “We’re interested in working with people that are really trying to push forward working-class politics and these sort of basic social safety net programs. And they have things to offer people. So it allows us the flexibility to be a little bit more creative.”

The video’s crescendo is driven by Ocasio-Cortez’s narration, which she also scripted:

    This race is about people versus money — we’ve got people, they’ve got money. It’s time we acknowledged that not all Democrats are the same. That a Democrat who takes corporate money, profits off foreclosure, doesn’t live here, doesn’t send his kids to our schools, doesn’t drink our water or breathe our air, cannot possibly represent us.

    What the Bronx and Queens needs is ‘Medicare for All,’ tuition-free public college, a federal jobs guarantee, and criminal justice reform.

To Hayes, movement candidates like Ocasio-Cortez and Means of Production are a natural fit.

“I don’t think you could drop on the ground of, like, a Hillary Clinton campaign and find people so willing to be a part of a production,” he said. “You really have to have someone who’s charismatic and inspirational and leading that movement there on the ground in order to make that viable.”
“Trust the Rich Less, Trust Each Other More”

An interview with
    Nick Hayes 
    Naomi Burton 

Means of Production, the film collective from Detroit that made Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez’s hit campaign ad, is about to launch a left streaming platform — Netflix for socialists.

A still from Means of Production's campaign ad for Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez.

Luke Savage
Our new issue, on what a President Bernie Sanders could actually do in office, is out now. Subscribe today to receive it!
Abolish the Billionaire Class
A Plan to Win Socialism In America
Peter Gowan
Wielding the Imperial Presidency
Meagan Day
Ilhan Omar Is Not Antisemitic
Seth Ackerman

Interview by
    Meagan Day

Means of Production is a socialist film production team based in Detroit, Michigan. Last year they released their debut electoral campaign video. The candidate wasn’t your average baby-kisser. It was Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez.

The ad wasn’t played on television but still got millions of views, going viral on social media and attracting national attention far beyond the congressional race itself. On Twitter, influential activists and journalists hailed it as “the best campaign ad of 2018.”

A few months later, Means of Production dropped two ads for Hawaii congressional candidate Kaniela Ing. Again, one was crowned “the most remarkable political ad of 2018.”

Means of Production’s Naomi Burton and Nick Hayes kept their foot on the gas pedal. By the end of the year, they’d made videos to mark the Democratic Socialists of America’s (DSA’s) 50,000 member milestone, for the campaign to establish a public bank in Los Angeles, for an academic labor union in Ypsilanti, for democratic-socialist candidates in Ann Arbor and Rhode Island, and for Progressive International, a joint project of Yanis Varoufakis and Bernie Sanders.

Jacobin’s Meagan Day talked with Burton and Hayes about busting American class myths, creating a new socialist vocabulary, preparing for Bernie 2020, and about Means TV — a “post-capitalist subscription-based streaming service” coming in 2019.
MD

Everyone seems to agree that the Ocasio-Cortez ad was not usual campaign fare. What made it different?
NH

It’s socialism. This ad performed well because it communicated a working-class story with a socialist politics behind it.

We spent a lot of time in pre-production talking through her whole story, talking about her politics, about the community she’d represent and what it’s like to live there. We wanted to root the ad in that community, so people would watch it and recognize it as the place they live, addressing the issues they face, like how insanely expensive it is to raise a family in New York City.
NB

The reason we were so struck by her in the first place is that she was just a normal working-class person who shared our politics. She’s our age. She lives in an apartment that has the same shitty yellow tile that mine does. And she’s someone whose experience is incredibly important to her politics, so we tried to create an authentic portrayal of that experience, and give it a pace and an energy that would make people want to watch the whole thing.
MD

The goal of a typical campaign ad is usually just media saturation and brand recognition. Most campaign ads are devoid of political content, because the candidates and the filmmakers treat them as marketing, not as political messaging. Where does your approach differ?
NB

Yeah, a typical campaign ad is just like thirty seconds, three vague talking points. Sometimes an emotional scene, but there’s never any substance behind the words that they’re saying. Even the more substantial ones are often just using platitudes.

We’re a generation who, or at least I did, totally bought into the Obama hope-and-change messaging. That’s what consultants tell political candidates to do, to use this flat language. We’re trying to stay away from that. We want to talk about actual things that could change people’s lives.
NH

We don’t work with candidates who take corporate money, and we’re even cautious around progressive candidates. We’re looking for socialist candidates who are comfortable calling themselves that. And we’re looking for people with a story to tell that will speak to the working class.

If we were to put all this time and energy into like a video for like Hillary Clinton or somebody, we can do all the filmmaking in the world and it’s still going to come across super robotic, and make working-class people feel disconnected.
MD

Not long after the Ocasio-Cortez ad came out, you linked up with Kaniela Ing and gave him the same treatment. I know they’re both DSA members, and so are you two. Can you tell me more about the political vision that unites the candidates you’ve produced work for?
NB

They’re socialists, and they’re able to articulate that. Kaniela is someone we’ve admired for years, because he’s had the courage to continuously push and lead the conversation left. We created all of the videos in this election cycle to really build on each other and to introduce a new socialist vocabulary for viewers.

We don’t have any language around socialism in the United States. People barely know what “austerity” means. I barely knew what it meant until 2016, even though I was being affected by it.
NH

Our purpose is political. Naomi comes from a corporate marketing and public relations background, and I have experience with corporate filmmaking. Our goal is to put those skills to use making socialist content.

Typically these media tools are only available to the richest corporations, or just corporations in general. When we met through DSA, we both thought, “We’re two extremely important conduits of this corporate propaganda, and we could just remove ourselves and use those skills working to promote socialism.” We realized we had all these skills, but we were using them to speak in an inherently anti-worker language.
NB

And there was a vacuum. Production companies don’t want to come out with a video that has socialist themes or ideas, because they have to turn around and sell that video to their next client. To our knowledge, there’s no other production company at this point that can create really high-end content that isn’t also working with corporate Democrats, or Republicans. Or, like, Wells Fargo. Or all of the above.
NH

When we did the ad for Matt Brown, who ran for governor in Rhode Island, there are lines in that video that draw explicitly from Marxist economic texts. We’re trying to normalize socialist language.
MD

You all undertook this project at just the right moment. For the first time in more than half a century in the United States, it seems possible to speak to the public about socialism without it being taboo or alienating. Why is that?
NB

Well, for millennials, we’re in our mid-twenties to mid-thirties, and we’ve spent most of our life witnessing endless war. Meanwhile none of us can pay back our student debt, none of us can afford health care. I can’t even live in the city my parents are from, and they were really poor. Our prospects are so limited that we’re trying to find new solutions.
NH

There are no more paths forward for liberalism. It’s game over there. Young people realize it, definitely. I don’t have a single friend who’s like, “You know what we need is more technocratic administration of empire.”
NB

Bernie Sanders had a lot to do with it, too. He had everything to do with us starting Means of Production. He talked about material ways that we can make this world better, in a way that we understood.
NH

Class is something that’s been so stuffed down in politics, and Bernie brought it back up and said, “You are in the working class and there is a conflict between you and the owners of society.” That snapped so much into focus for me. Bernie’s campaign was the first campaign I ever volunteered on.
NB

Alexandria volunteered on his campaign, too. I think Bernie Sanders is certainly the reason that all of this is happening at this moment. If he hadn’t run for president, I don’t know that any of this would have come about.
MD

So you two met in DSA in Detroit?
NB

Yeah, we both went to the same first meeting — the first meeting after the Trump election.
MD

Hey, me too! Half of the room was people my age, and the other half was older people who’ve been members for decades going, “Where the hell did you all come from?”
NB

Yeah, exactly. I went because I was so perplexed by Donald Trump’s victory. Which, looking back on it, I realize I shouldn’t have been. But like many other people I was certain it wouldn’t happen. I was talking about it with a friend, and he told me, “DSA is my home base, a place where I can go to be with people who understand the world the way I do, and help me understand it even better.” The first meeting I wasn’t sure what to think, but at least it was something real — not just like, “Let’s get ladies into office.”
NH

Our first meeting was about socialist feminism, actually. It was contrasted in that meeting to liberal feminism, which was a huge relief after the way the “Bernie Bro” narrative played out in 2016, pitting feminists against socialists, and not addressing the inequities between women and men and among women that a capitalist economy creates.

If he runs again, we’re well-prepared this time around. We’re not letting that Bernie Bro narrative get ahead of us.
MD

I agree, I think we’re way more prepared. And I have a prediction that we’ll see something similar this time — except it won’t hinge on gender, it will hinge on race. This time, in the same way that we were able to say that universal health care is a feminist demand, we’re going to have to keep foregrounding that it’s an antiracist demand, too. Or that a Green New Deal featuring a federal job guarantee is an antiracist demand, because people of color experience the highest rates of unemployment and suffer the worst of environmental degradation.
NB

We learned a lot from the experience of the 2016 election and afterward. I think the main lesson we’ve drawn is to be confident in our message, and strategically communicate our politics ahead of time, not just reacting to attacks. And to not be afraid.
NH

I think also what needs to happen this time around, if Bernie runs, is we need to elevate writers and influencers of color and publish them, put them on screen, put them in positions of visibility where they can articulate this themselves.
MD

Is Means of Production formally gearing up for a Bernie 2020 run?
NH

We’re trying to build the spaceship he needs. We certainly are thinking about ways to create content outside of actually working with Bernie that supports him, and very much hoping that we can actually work with him too.
MD

I know what you’re planning for 2019 is way bigger in scope than election-related content. What’s Means TV?
NH

Means TV is a post-capitalist subscription-based streaming service. It’s cooperatively run, and it’s a direct challenge to capitalism and the establishment entertainment structures. The best parallel is something like Netflix or Hulu. We’re a network that creates original content and acquires content from other people that we feel aligns with our values. We’ll produce and distribute that content with the goal of providing a cooperative platform for socialist writers, filmmakers, comedians, and entertainers.
NB

In a few months, we’re going to begin a ten-week free platform launch campaign, where we’re just trying to get people to understand what it is and develop an appetite for it.
NH

Which will take some adjusting. A post-capitalist subscription-based streaming service — we know it will take a minute for people to wrap their minds around that.
NB

When the platform launches for real, it will be home to series, documentaries, feature films, short films, comedy, and animation.
NH

In the process of building for this, we’re also seeding ground in the YouTube wars, which the Right is currently winning. Like, YouTube knows me, the algorithm knows who I am, I’m sure they know everything about me. Yet they’re still feeding me videos by Jordan Peterson and Joe Rogan. So we also want to create short-form viral content on YouTube to really compete with the right-wing propaganda being pushed out. We’re working in tandem with a friend who already has a very popular meme YouTube account, and we’ll be posting all of our freebie content on that channel.
MD

What will conceptually and politically unite all of this disparate content?
NB

We want people to register themselves as workers. We want people to start thinking, “We’re all in this against those five guys who own everything.”
NH

We want to tell a different story about class than the one you get in the mainstream media. The dominant understanding is that you can just jump wherever you want to go. Like, you want to be upper-class? Go for it. That’s not how class works.

One of the biggest myths is that there’s a middle class and everyone’s in it. All the time I hear, “I’m struggling, but I’m like lower-middle-class.” It’s like, no, we’re working class. We are all working to create wealth for other people.

We want to make people trust the rich less, and trust each other more.

Another big thing we have to communicate is the fact that things have gotten significantly worse for the average working person. We’re all fed this story that things are are getting better, even when everyone can feel that they aren’t, because things inevitably get better by virtue of the progression of human civilization or something. And that is very much not the case.
NB

We want to make people understand that the difficulties they’re experiencing are part of the chaos of capitalism. And that we can choose to close that chapter and now we can open up a new one. That’s a big reason we’re calling it “post-capitalist,” that optimism.
MD

To what extent is Means TV designed and intended to make socialism go mainstream?
NB

Socialism deserves a hell of a lot more than a niche. It’s been purposely stomped out of our culture, of our conversations, of our political atmosphere. But it was alive and well in this country in the past, and it can be again. In order for that to happen, people need to start encountering a socialist perspective in a variety of contexts, including maybe a comedic animation about how much work sucks.
NH

It’s really hard to reach people physically in huge numbers, but we can reach people with entertainment, we can reach people with a true social media. And we have to try, because we haven’t won socialism yet with the people we’ve got.

Meet the Team Behind Means TV, a Video-Streaming Platform They Want to Be "Netflix for the Left"

“We need to rebuild the culture of revolt."

Imagine this: Your sweetie texts you about how to spend your quiet night in together, or you’re looking for the perfect binge watch to reward yourself after a tough finals week. As you’re scrolling through the latest additions to your favorite streaming site, you realize the entire entertainment industry is actually a capitalist machine designed to monetize your eagerness to chill.

What if, instead, you could pop on something about the history of colonization, the challenges of workplace hierarchies, or socialist feminism?

That’s exactly the world Naomi Burton and Nick Hayes are trying to create with Means TV. The duo behind Means of Production, which put together Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez’s viral smash hit campaign ad last year, is busy building a streaming platform service. They hope to bring to the world what Jacobin called “Netflix for socialists” and Burton calls “Netflix for the left.”
Trending Now
BTS with Marsai Martin and Nico Parker for Teen Vogue's March Digital Cover

Hayes tells Teen Vogue that the project arose out of their interest to “shift the culture towards one where socialism and overthrowing capitalism becomes the possibility.” Burton says the “post-capitalist, subscription-based streaming platform” will feature exclusively anti-capitalist content, “all of it with the idea that we have to be within the culture, introducing these ideas to people before they're just accepted.”

“We need to rebuild the culture of revolt and tear down a lot of these individualist ideas that are pushed in entertainment,” Hayes explains. “We are working to build solidarity through entertainment, to build class consciousness, to build frustration and anger towards capitalism.”
Politician Kaniela Ing on set amid cameras and mics.

Politician Kaniela Ing on set.
Courtesy Means of Production

The pair is especially hopeful that their new project will resonate with younger audiences, even amid concerns that the recent upsurge in socialism’s popularity with young people might not last as millennials and Generation Z grow up. It’s an age-old idea that getting older means getting more conservative.

“Am I just gonna become some crusty old dude who's like, ‘Yeah, I used to be a socialist, and then I woke up to the real world?’” Hayes says. “I think that the people we hear that coming from are a generation where they weren't facing any real crises. They weren't facing climate change, they weren't facing 17 years of occupation in the Middle East.”

“It feels very different to me,” Hayes, who’s 21, says of his cohort. “We are [a] socialist generation as millennials because we grew up in such precarious economic conditions and such precarious global conditions.”

Burton, who’s 29, says that there’s a subversive element to socialism’s youth appeal: “I think a lot of the reason [socialism is] so popular right now is there is such an effort over the last four years to really stomp out even the idea that socialism could be a possibility here. And there's been a real effort by media and by the establishment on both sides to say, ‘Capitalism is the system, we've landed on the answer, we're good now.’”

“I think all of a sudden in the last two years, a lot of people have been exposed — because of [Vermont senator] Bernie Sanders — to this different kind of economic system that actually has a lot of solutions to a lot of the crises we see,” she says.
A woman sits in front of a pink backdrop flanked by lights and a boom mic in the foreground crew shoots her with a camera

On-set shot of the Climate Hacks series.
Courtesy Means of Production

The out-front nature of the duo’s capitalist critique developed largely after they started attending Democratic Socialists of America (DSA) meetings in Detroit following the 2016 presidential election.

“We were angry and frustrated that the Democrats lost what we saw as the easiest-to-win election ever,” Burton explains. She shares that she and Nick attended their first meeting the same night.

“It was what we were looking for,” Hayes says of the DSA. Hayes bought a camera the day after the election, met Burton at the DSA meeting, and soon after, the pair started to see ways to take advantage of their communication skills for a higher purpose. That’s why they started Means of Production, a media cooperative specifically engineered to give labor unions, political organization, and candidates an alternative to for-profit media production on their campaigns. Burton says they were joined by other DSA members who similarly saw that the talents they were using in jobs at for-profit companies could be turned toward the political work they wanted to advance.

“We realized: Wait, we have a lot more to do with this, and we can actually take the skills and the resources and the expertise that we gleaned from the private sector and bring that to the left to create high-quality video,” Burton says.

“For socialism,” Hayes adds.

Burton and Hayes both drew inspiration from Sanders’s 2016 presidential campaign that brought up questions about his democratic socialist beliefs, as they saw that even Sanders was working with for-profit companies because there was a “void” in commercial-quality, high-production-value video production, Burton says.

Means of Production’s first big hit was with an underdog candidate from the Bronx whose socialist message immediately drew them in. Before Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez (D-NY) was tearing it up on Capitol Hill, she was a longshot running against one of the Democrats’ biggest players. Burton and Hayes say their relationship with the congresswoman known as AOC began somewhat unconventionally.
Alexandria OcasioCortez sits amont mics and lights on a film set in an apartment

Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez on set.
Courtesy Means of Production

“As she always says, ‘It all goes down in the DMs,’” Burton explains. “One day, I was on Facebook and I saw this video of this woman and she was clearly speaking about socialism. She was clearly saying socialism. And she was running for Congress in New York.”

“I just reached out to her on Twitter,” Burton shares. “She responded within an hour. We were on the phone the next day with the campaign.”

Burton says AOC was involved in every part of the production process as they learned her story and the basis for her politics. The two made clear that when it comes to candidates they’ll work with, it’s socialists only.

“We can do such a better video when we are working with somebody who is a socialist,” Hayes says.

Means TV will start a free, 10-week rollout this spring with a Bread and Roses campaign offering up educational (bread) and entertaining (roses) content to build the brand and fundraise for the eventual launch of the Netflix-style platform itself later in 2019. Aside from the financial needs they hope to meet, the duo is also hoping to provide a venue for better representation for people left out of the for-profit media game.

“A huge part of Means TV comes out of a criticism of this entertainment establishment, which is that it is completely nepotistic, highly misogynistic,” Hayes explains. “Overall, it is largely inaccessible for working people, for people who come from less privileged backgrounds, for people who are people of color, are LGBTQ, women — all sorts of different folks just have no access into the entertainment establishment.”

Ultimately, despite whatever challenges may come, Hayes believes that being out front about their pro-socialist, anti-capitalist stance will be a boon to Means TV as it grows because, in his view, “That is something that has a lot of appeal with young people who seek authenticity in a world totally filled with bullshit.”
Video: After 3 Million Views, 2 Detroit Socialists Are Ready for Their Closeup



Nick Hayes and Naomi Burton

Pragmatic people may look at the victory of Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez last month in New York City’s 14th Congressional district primary as a fluke or the sort of lucky break that can happen in low-turnout elections. Naomi Burton and Nick Hayes, Detroiters and filmmakers, aren’t among them. To these two young socialists, the upset is a foothold, an opportunity. 

Ocasio-Cortez pulled off the upset of the summer.

And a beginning.

Means of Production, their company, consists of just the two of them and a lot of ambition, enough to send Twitter DMs to Ocasio-Cortez this spring, after seeing a Facebook video of the 28-year-old candidate and finding her platform -- straight out of the Democratic Socialists of America/Bernie Sanders playbook -- admirable. They offered to help her with her messaging by doing a get-to-know-the-candidate video for far less than she would pay an established political consultant.

Ocasio-Cortez responded immediately, and Burton and Hayes boarded a train for New York shortly thereafter. Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents got on at three different stops, she said, checking papers of their fellow passengers. It seemed to underline the urgency of their mission – “a nice little dystopian twist,” as Burton puts it.

A two-minute video by the three of them, "The Courage to Change,” went off like a bomb, quickly gaining hundreds of thousands of views.

It shows Ocasio-Cortez doing all sorts of un-politician-y things – putting on mascara, waiting for the train – and served as both an introduction and a call to arms for voters in a race against Joe Crowley, who outspent her 5-to-1 and was thought to be unbeatable.

“After 20 years of the same representation we have to ask, who has New York been changing for?” Ocasio-Cortez says in a voiceover. “Every day gets harder for working families like mine to get by. The rent gets higher, health care covers less, and our income stays the same. It’s clear these changes haven’t been for us, and we deserve a champion.”

If this be socialism, voters said, bring on the socialism.

A Washington Post column by a veteran GOP political consultant says: “Even though she gets around to the leftist policy positions, she doesn’t sound looney, threatening or half-cocked the way Republicans want. She shares Bernie Sanders’s agenda but with a much more sensible demeanor.”

Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez in the campaign video.

Proletarian base in Southwest Detroit

This is all very pleasing to Burton and Hayes, 29 and 21 respectively, a couple in a career moment when they can not only afford to be idealistic,  but intend to be. They're young and live in modest apartments, embedded with the proletariat in Southwest Detroit.

They not only don’t soften the socialist language for their elders, raised on the Evil Empire and distant memories of the Cuban missile crisis, they call their work by its name: Propaganda.

Burton, a veteran of two international public-relations firms who did work for such capitalist outfits as General Motors, called herself “a basic neolib Democrat” until the 2016 election, a “coming-to-Jesus moment,” when it occurred to her she was working for the wrong side.

“People think capitalism is like gravity,” Hayes said. “Something that has to be taken for granted. It’s not.”

Both agree that “vicious” capitalism is at the heart of working-class woes, but the two of them, having trained among the opposition (Hayes has been making films since he was a teenager), realized they could effectively defect and use their skills in service to the other side.

They named their company after Karl Marx’s economic theory in “Das Kapital” – that workers should own the means of production that creates wealth. In Marx’s day, that might be a factory. Today, it’s a laptop, video camera and the skills to use them well.

Can't 'pretend the world's not burning'

“We want to take (our) expertise, resources and knowledge into this world with no high-end content,” Burton said. “We can’t sit around the water cooler and pretend the world’s not burning.”

As their website, which isn’t even fully built out yet, states, “The medium of film has been weaponized against working people. We are working to explore subscriber funded, cooperatively owned, anti-misogynistic, anti-racist, working class entertainment with the goal of building a more egalitarian, democratic, utopian society.”

The phone began ringing the day after the Ocasio-Cortez upset and hasn’t stopped. Besides the media attention, the two have gotten multiple inquiries by individual candidates looking to duplicate Ocasio-Cortez’ upset, but they’re not naming names. And they don’t want to change what they set out to do when they formed Means of Production – not to be merely hired hands, but creative partners in crafting messaging, er, propaganda.

Outside of political candidates, they’re working with labor unions and nonprofits dedicated to improving the lives of working people.

“You don’t win elections by pandering, but by communicating a bold vision to non-voters, to people who haven’t been engaged in the past,” Burton said. “The socialist bread-and-butter is speaking to working-class people, offering a more humane alternative. In a moral and wealthy society, no one should be poor.”
