Bernie Sanders staffs up for 2020

Bernie Sanders is adding firepower to his political team ahead of a potential 2020 campaign, locking down digital alumni who were key to his surprise performance in 2016 and recruiting the media production company that helped launch Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez to prominence.

The flurry of activity, detailed by four people familiar with the campaign’s thinking, is the latest sign that the Vermont senator is closing in on a decision on a second run for the White House.

Means of Production, the filmmaking cooperative that created the viral campaign video that propelled Ocasio-Cortez’s House campaign, is in talks with the Sanders team about a major role in 2020. And two people who powered Sanders’ record-breaking small-dollar fundraising operation in 2016 have agreed to join a subsequent presidential bid if it materializes, according to a Sanders campaign aide: Tim Tagaris and Robin Curran, his digital fundraising director and digital production director in 2016, respectively.

The aide said another pair that have helped Sanders build a digital media juggernaut out of his Senate office — media producer Armand Aviram and digital director Georgia Parke — are likely to be part of his 2020 team, too.

The behind-the-scenes moves underscore one of Sanders’ key strengths: He is poised to enter the Democratic primary field with a digital operation and social media army that outpaces virtually any other candidate, at least for now. For all the attention on Beto O’Rourke’s online dominance last year, only Sanders would start the campaign on the foundation of a full-fledged, grassroots presidential campaign.
COUNTDOWN TO 2020

The race for 2020 starts now. Stay in the know. Follow our presidential election coverage.
Email

By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

The steps also suggest that Sanders has every intention of trying to reactivate the army of liberal activists he amassed two years ago, undergirded by an unapologetic Democratic socialist message backed by a state-of-the-art fundraising and digital infrastructure.

“Sen. Sanders maintains an organic and very expansive social media following that really only he has” among possible 2020 contenders, said David Duhalde, political director of Sanders-founded Our Revolution. “He has a significant advantage.”

Naomi Burton and Nick Hayes, activists in the Democratic Socialists of America who left a global public relations agency and commercial production freelancing to launch Means of Production, rocketed into the national spotlight last year when they produced the hit ad highlighting Ocasio-Cortez’s working-class roots and left-wing policies. It received 300,000 views in a day and eventually racked up nearly 4.6 million views on Twitter and YouTube.

“They’ve proven that they’re on the cutting-edge of popularizing progressive populist and democratic socialist politics in America,” said Waleed Shahid, a spokesman for Justice Democrats, the progressive political action committee that recruited Ocasio-Cortez.

Burton said the Detroit-based team would likely create “big, beautiful ads” and “drumbeat content” for Sanders if it was brought on for 2020.

"We have certainly been talking with his team," she said, adding that if Sanders runs, "He's the only candidate we would work for.”
Former Housing and Urban Development Secretary Julián Castro announces his candidacy for president.

2020 Elections
‘They heard the message’: Castro makes play for the Obama coalition

By NOLAN D. MCCASKILL

Tagaris, a member of Sanders’ inner circle who was expected to be part of any 2020 campaign, is known as a trailblazer in small-dollar fundraising. Now the owner of Aisle 518 Strategies, he has been running Sanders’ email program and digital advertising. Curran, in addition to working on Sanders’ 2016 campaign, was the Democratic National Committee's email director during the 2018 midterm cycle.

Asked about their future roles, Tagaris confirmed that, along with him and Curran, who is now vice president of digital strategy at Aisle 518 Strategies, his firm’s Hal Irish and Saron Olkaba have also pledged to be part of any 2020 Sanders campaign.

Curran’s allies said she transformed the DNC’s email program, which critics considered almost beyond repair, during her time there.

Aviram, a former producer for the millennial-focused media company NowThis News, and other Senate staffers have posted more than 1,000 videos on Sanders’ Facebook and Twitter pages over the past two years, on everything from labor strikes to climate change to the government shutdown. They’ve allowed Sanders to bypass traditional media and, when it comes to audience size, sometimes surpass it.

This week, Sanders’ Senate team streamed his rebuttal to President Donald Trump’s Oval Office address on Facebook, Twitter and YouTube, which went on to garner more than 1.1 million views. In comparison, former Texas Rep. O’Rourke, who is also considering a presidential bid, received almost 200,000 views when he filmed himself on Facebook Live for more than an-hour-and-a-half to refute Trump; a short clip of the video got another 480,000 views on Twitter.

CrowdTangle data recently compiled by a person close to the Sanders campaign also underscores his social media muscle compared with other presidential hopefuls: Sanders’ videos had nearly 1.5 billion views in 2017 and 2018 on Facebook — almost three times more than all other potential 2020 Democratic candidates’ videos combined, according to the report. He also outpaced other possible contenders in Facebook interactions.

Still, other presidential aspirants are building up their digital teams, too, and could ramp them up to overcome Sanders. Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D-Mass.) has waxed about her policy stances and affinity for beer on Instagram Live since announcing her exploratory committee. O’Rourke has proven to be a social media sensation: One video he posted at the end of last year slamming Trump’s proposal for a border wall had more than 5.4 million views.
Sen. Elizabeth Warren speaks during a New Hampshire organizing event.

2020 Elections
Warren calls for 'systemic change' in first New Hampshire swing

By STEPHANIE MURRAY

Critically, some key Sanders alumni have defected to O’Rourke: According to the New York Times, Middle Seat, a digital firm created by former Sanders staffers, is "hoping" to be part of an O’Rourke 2020 campaign. Other former employees not working on the digital staff have joined Warren’s operation or otherwise signaled they are looking at different campaigns.

The defections highlight how drastically different a primary race Sanders would face this time, with potentially dozens of candidates including several others competing for a lane he had to himself in 2016.

Meanwhile, other major changes are underway in Sanders' inner circle. Last week, CNN reported his 2016 campaign manager, Jeff Weaver, would not return to a 2020 campaign in that role, instead serving as a senior adviser.

Sanders, 77, has not decided whether to run for president a second time. In recent weeks, he has come under fire over reports detailing sexual harassment by male staffers on his 2016 campaign, as well as an alleged pay disparity between male and female aides. Sanders has apologized to the women who said they were harassed and promised that his 2018 Senate campaign implemented new guidelines to prevent sexual misconduct.

“To the women in our campaign who were harassed or mistreated, I apologize,” Sanders said last week. “Our standards, our procedures, our safeguards, were clearly inadequate.”

Sanders has said he will “probably run” for president if he believes he is the best candidate to defeat Trump.

Whoever the eventual Democratic nominee is, that person will need to be able to compete on social media with Trump, who, like Sanders, has used Twitter to bypass mainstream media.

On Saturday, the People for Bernie Sanders hosted more than 400 house parties throughout the country to push Sanders to run in 2020.

Winnie Wong, a co-founder of the group, said the events showed that outside pro-Sanders organizations also have extensive social media power that can be put to use in a presidential election.

“Sanders’ grassroots social media machine is very much driving these house parties,” she said. “We are able to organize without any formal organizing plan in place.”
How a Ragtag Group of Socialist Filmmakers Produced One of the Most Viral Campaign Ads of 2018
Zaid Jilani

June 5 2018, 10:05 a.m.

Bronx activist and community organizer Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez is challenging longtime New York Democratic Rep. Joe Crowley in his primary on June 26. By all measures, the former Bernie Sanders organizer is an underdog, going up against the powerful chair of the House Democratic Caucus who has more than $1.6 million in cash on hand (Ocasio-Cortez has raised around $200,000).

But in a social media-focused campaign video released on May 30, Ocasio-Cortez sought to turn this money gap into a liability for Crowley — telling a story about her life and the lives of thousands of other working-class New Yorkers who continue to be squeezed by the high cost of health care, education, and housing.

“This race is about people versus money,” Ocasio-Cortez says in the ad. “We’ve got people. They’ve got money.”

Within a day, the video had over 300,000 views.

It’s not hard to see why. The video is tightly produced, crafting a narrative about an organizer-candidate who has the same sort of working-class background that is representative of the majority of New York’s 14th Congressional District — the median income in the district is $53,512 — taking on a powerful incumbent backed by Wall Street dollars.

What you may be surprised to find out is that the video was produced not by Hollywood video production veterans or high-dollar political consultants, but by a ragtag pair of socialists based in Detroit.

Last year, Detroit-based Democratic Socialists of America activists Naomi Burton and Nick Hayes formed Means of Production, a media production company that works exclusively for the working class. (DSA has since endorsed Ocasio-Cortez.)

Both were veterans of other communications firms and were troubled by the fact that many of these firms worked both for progressive candidates and corporations working against the very same causes.

“It just didn’t compute to us that the same people creating working-class propaganda are creating essentially propaganda for corporations,” Hayes said.

“We did this, really, with the goal of building kind of an effective, functional left media structure,” Burton explained.

She first reached out to the Ocasio-Cortez campaign in March, after she learned about the candidate on Facebook. “Her message was bold. It was unapologetic. It had a clear leftist vision that I could understand as just a normal person, that I thought other working people could identify with,” she explained. “And after doing a little bit of digging, I realized she didn’t have a campaign video.”

So she sent Ocasio-Cortez a Twitter direct message explaining how Means of Production could help the campaign. A month later, the team went to New York City, and a month after that, the video was released. Thus, in less than 2 1/2 months, a pair of socialist upstart filmmakers in Detroit conceived, produced, and released one of the most viral campaign videos of 2018.

Hayes was hesitant to disclose the campaign’s exact budget for the commercial, but told The Intercept that the entire project cost less than $10,000. Costs were kept low because virtually everyone in the ad was a community member, a volunteer, or a member of Ocasio-Cortez’s family. Much of the video was produced simply by following Ocasio-Cortez around during the campaign. The closing shot of the film is set in an apartment.

“A lot of the footage, like following … the person putting up campaign posters and things like that, that’s just people out doing work in the community for her, in the campaign,” Hayes said.

The success of the video shoot raises the question: Why do candidates spend so much money on high-priced consultants who produce boring, safe videos, when ideologically aligned, camera-savvy activists can do it quicker, cheaper, and with more vitality?

“For a lot of these political candidates, who have nothing to offer people … staging a whole thing and creating this whole kind of fake world is necessary because, you know, you’re working from nothing, you have nothing to work with,” Hayes said, crediting Ocasio-Cortez’s political vision with inspiring the themes of the video. “We’re interested in working with people that are really trying to push forward working-class politics and these sort of basic social safety net programs. And they have things to offer people. So it allows us the flexibility to be a little bit more creative.”

The video’s crescendo is driven by Ocasio-Cortez’s narration, which she also scripted:

    This race is about people versus money — we’ve got people, they’ve got money. It’s time we acknowledged that not all Democrats are the same. That a Democrat who takes corporate money, profits off foreclosure, doesn’t live here, doesn’t send his kids to our schools, doesn’t drink our water or breathe our air, cannot possibly represent us.

    What the Bronx and Queens needs is ‘Medicare for All,’ tuition-free public college, a federal jobs guarantee, and criminal justice reform.

To Hayes, movement candidates like Ocasio-Cortez and Means of Production are a natural fit.

“I don’t think you could drop on the ground of, like, a Hillary Clinton campaign and find people so willing to be a part of a production,” he said. “You really have to have someone who’s charismatic and inspirational and leading that movement there on the ground in order to make that viable.”
Ocasio-Cortez, Hegar and the art of making your political ad feel like an uplifting movie

Even if you haven’t heard of Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and MJ Hegar, you’ve probably seen them.

The women, candidates for the U.S. House in New York and Texas after winning their Democratic primaries, star in a current crop of viral campaign videos that are captivating online viewers and, just maybe, redefining the form.

In “The Courage to Change,” Ocasio-Cortez narrates a capsule history of her life, recounting how she was born in the Bronx, worked as an educator, organizer and waitress and became a candidate because “every day gets harder for working families like mine to get by.” Created by the Detroit-based production cooperative Means of Production and composed of lyrical images of Ocasio-Cortez and her fellow New Yorkers going about their workaday lives, the two-minute video builds to a stirring finish, with a disarmingly candid moment of the candidate switching shoes on a subway platform intercut with shots of rousing speeches and inspired crowds.

Even more galvanizing is “Doors,” a 3½ -minute video in which Hegar, a former Air Force pilot, describes a near-fatal helicopter incident in Afghanistan, her childhood with an abusive father and fighting the Pentagon to secure ground combat positions for women. Clearly inspired by the work of Martin Scorsese, director Cayce McCabe seamlessly edits the video to resemble one continuous shot, as the chapters of Hegar’s life gracefully mesh and call back to one another while a deconstructed version of “Gimme Shelter” plays in the background.

As political spots, “The Courage to Change” and “Doors” effectively acquit their mission, which is to introduce two unknowns to their would-be constituents. As examples of how cinematic craft and production values infuse and inform contemporary political rhetoric, these short-subject documentaries exemplify visual storytelling at its most exquisite and economical.

[With blunt talk and compelling stories, viral videos are turning unknown female candidates into political sensations]

Between the two of them, “Doors” and “The Courage to Change” have been seen about 3 million times on YouTube, representing something of a watershed moment during this midterm season. But this is by no means the first time that campaign advertising has leveraged film language and communications technology so effectively. In 1960, crooner and movie star Frank Sinatra sang “High Hopes” in ads for John F. Kennedy. By 1964, the vernacular had gotten decidedly edgier when Lyndon Johnson’s presidential campaign produced “Daisy,” in which a little girl plucks the petals from a flower while counting to herself. As she reaches “ten,” she looks up, the frame freezes and the camera zooms in on her eye, culminating in an exploding mushroom cloud.

The one-minute ad, which tacitly accused Johnson’s opponent, Barry Goldwater, of being an irrational warmonger, was broadcast only once on NBC. Excoriated for going too far, the Johnson campaign quickly pulled the ad. Still, an estimated 50 million people had watched as a darling little girl in a meadow was symbolically annihilated by a nuclear bomb — and the number doubled when, under pressure, the Johnson campaign pulled the ad and all three networks reported on the controversy.

Goldwater is never mentioned by name in the “Daisy” ad; its creators understood the first rule of horror films, which is that the scariest monster is the one the audience concocts in their heads. A few years later, Robert F. Kennedy would enlist such filmmakers as Charles Guggenheim, Robert Drew, D.A. Pennebaker and John Frankenheimer to create ads for his 1968 presidential campaign, clips of which can be seen in the absorbing Netflix documentary series “Bobby Kennedy for President.” Using the cinema-verite style for which Pennebaker would become famous with the Bob Dylan documentary “Don’t Look Back,” the Kennedy of these ads was a rock star in his own right, captured at his most self-deprecating, candid and warm, whether he was charming a living room full of skeptical Indiana farm wives or speaking gently and respectfully to a group of schoolchildren about the scourges of nuclear war and environmental destruction.

For the ensuing half-century, candidates would attempt, with varying degrees of success, to speak the visual language of their moment. Sometimes they’ve had to be bilingual: Hillary Clinton’s presidential campaign announcement in 2007 straddled two visual cultures, evincing the lush, soft-focus production values of a Nancy Meyers rom-com but widely seen on YouTube, then a relatively new and untested platform.

It was Clinton’s opponent, Barack Obama, who would master that medium. Appropriately enough, Obama’s most memorable ad, Will.I.Am’s “Yes We Can” video, wasn’t an official campaign production but user-generated content. (Four years later, Herman Cain and Mitt Romney would have their own viral moments, not always for desirable reasons.) Donald Trump, for his part, barely needed campaign ads at all: Already known to an American public steeped in reality TV, he merely had to stage a rally for an all-too-willing press to show up, as much for entertainment value as hard news.

In advertising parlance, that’s called “earned media,” which means it’s free. And that’s the great value of such videos as “The Courage to Change” and “Doors” going viral: Rather than pay for expensive TV spots, Ocasio-Cortez and Hegar can let novelty and sheer artistry build the buzz. This is particularly crucial at the outset of their primary campaigns, when they have a chance to define themselves before their opponents are able to, and before super-PAC money floods the general election.

The one-minute scare spot might be an artifact of the past, but the multiplier effect is the same: Get people talking, in this case by understanding that today’s endlessly streaming, cinema-literate viewers are as likely to respond to formal excellence as substantive content. Ocasio-Cortez and Hegar have brilliantly harnessed political tradition and of-the-moment signifiers to create awareness, enthusiasm and momentum (Frank Sinatra, meet the Stones). Like the movies and pop culture icons they reference, “The Courage to Change” and “Doors” succeed, not just because of their subjects’ compelling personal stories, but because of masterful, you’ve-gotta-see-this execution. Even though these candidates are newcomers, they possess the instinct of the old pros who know that advertising can be artful — and certainly effective — but old-fashioned ballyhoo is priceless.
Viral Videos Are Replacing Pricey Political Ads. They’re Cheaper, and They Work.


These are not the stories that candidates usually turn to the camera and open up about in ads.

One talked about her father’s violent temper and how she once watched him throw her mother through a plate glass door. Another recalled watching his brothers struggle to find steady work because of their criminal records. A third spoke of suffering a decade of sexual abuse as a child.

The wave of female, minority and outsider candidates that is breaking cultural barriers and toppling incumbents in the Democratic Party is also sweeping aside a longstanding norm in campaigns: That the public image of politicians — especially women — should be upbeat, uncontroversial and utterly conventional.

For many of these Democrats who were running against better-financed rivals, the breakthrough moment came after they got personal in relatively low-cost videos that went viral, reaching millions of people. Using documentary-style storytelling, which can last for several minutes, candidates have found a successful alternative to the traditional model of raising huge sums of money that get spent on expensive, 30-second television commercials.

The videos are chiefly intended as ads, but they also served a fund-raising purpose. For a fraction of the cost, these videos can help to spread a candidate’s story in a way that is easily shareable and can inspire donations.

Jahana Hayes, a Connecticut educator and first-time candidate who won a primary for Congress last month, produced a video for less than $20,000 that brought in $300,000 in donations. In it, she described the difficult circumstances of her upbringing — being raised by her grandmother while her mother battled addiction and then getting pregnant at 17.

In the housing project where she was raised, says Ms. Hayes, who was named National Teacher of the Year in 2016, “people are strong, but they aren’t supposed to run for Congress.”

“If Congress starts to look like us, no one can stop us,” she says.

Republican candidates this year have been using their own personal, sometimes primal, approach — though with far different messages and audiences in mind. They have largely stuck to the 30-second commercial format rather than the narrative videos, however.

“I believe in God, family and country. In that order,” said Brian Kemp, who won his party’s nomination for governor in Georgia after running a series of provocative ads that gained national notoriety. In one, called “Offends,” he boasts of unapologetically standing for the national anthem, saying Merry Christmas and supporting “ironclad borders.” If that doesn’t interest you, he says, “Then I’m not your guy.”
Editors’ Picks
Does This Dress Make Me Look Guilty?
The Secret History of the Jews From Shanghai
The Racial Bias Built Into Photography
Brian Kemp, the Republican nominee for governor in Georgia, appeared in a campaign ad while cocking a gun at a young man who is dating his daughter.CreditKemp for Governor
Image
Brian Kemp, the Republican nominee for governor in Georgia, appeared in a campaign ad while cocking a gun at a young man who is dating his daughter.CreditKemp for Governor

Another of Mr. Kemp’s ads shows him polishing and cocking a shotgun as a young man dating his daughter sits nervously to his side ticking off the list of campaign promises Mr. Kemp intends to fulfill. The firm that produced it, Something Else, in Northern Virginia, also made a viral ad for the Republican nominee for governor in Florida, Ron DeSantis, in which Mr. DeSantis’ children are shown paying homage to President Trump — one builds a wall out of play blocks, the other wears a onesie with the “Make America Great Again” slogan on it.

If the Republicans are appealing overtly to Trump supporters and conservatives, many Democrats are trying to telegraph a sense of shared struggle and life experience, while making the explicit assertion that a government cannot adequately represent the people it is supposed to serve unless its servants look like and live among the people.

Ayanna Pressley, whose primary victory over a 10-term Democratic congressman in the Boston area was the latest manifestation of the disruptive energy in the party’s progressive wing, helped raise her profile in Boston with a two-minute online video, called “The 1 Bus,” that showed her riding a city bus through her district. She narrates as the landscape outside changes from stately brick homes to blighted, vacant storefronts.

“I have stayed, on purpose, in close proximity to the hurt, acutely uncomfortable so that I’ll never grow complacent in tackling these inequities,” she says.
Sign Up for On Politics With Lisa Lerer

A spotlight on the people reshaping our politics. A conversation with voters across the country. And a guiding hand through the endless news cycle, telling you what you really need to know.
Ayanna Pressley made a two-minute video called “The 1 Bus.”CreditAyanna Pressley
Image
Ayanna Pressley made a two-minute video called “The 1 Bus.”CreditAyanna Pressley

Ms. Pressley’s campaign, which also produced an earlier video of her describing how she suffered  childhood sexual abuse and a campus sexual assault, had the bus video translated into Spanish, Chinese and Haitian Creole and largely spread its messages through social media. The only television ads the campaign paid for were on Spanish-language television.

“We knew we would be outraised and outspent, without a doubt,” said Sarah Groh, Ms. Pressley’s campaign manager. “So when it was a question of how do we deploy our resources we looked at where our voters were consuming their information. Social media is a big part of that. And I know we definitely got a bump with each of those videos.”

In one video for Stacey Abrams, the Democratic nominee for governor of Georgia, she describes growing up at times without health insurance and watching her parents work full-time jobs but still struggle to pay off student loans. “My story is not unique,” she says in the video, which was posted to Facebook.

Andrew Gillum, the Democratic nominee for governor of Florida, narrated a series of videos that were shared tens of thousands of times online in which he talked about becoming governor “for anyone who’s ever been told that they don’t belong.” In one video he tells a story of his mother opening the front door to see a police officer there because one of his brothers — all of whom had criminal records — was in trouble again.
Andrew Gillum, the Democratic candidate for governor in Florida, appeared in a video called “Bring It Home.”CreditAndrew Gillum for Governor
Image
Andrew Gillum, the Democratic candidate for governor in Florida, appeared in a video called “Bring It Home.”CreditAndrew Gillum for Governor

“I remember making the promise to myself that I wasn’t going to make my mom cry like that,” Mr. Gillum says. “She was going to cry because she was happy.”

Strategists say that messages of empowerment are especially potent today because many voters on the left are eager to see more women, minorities, young people and outsiders in government positions.

“People are broadening their definitions of what political leaders can look like,” said Teddy Goff, a co-founder of the agency Precision Strategies, a Democratic consulting firm, and President Barack Obama’s former digital director. “A political leader,” he added, “can be a 17-year-old from Parkland, Fla., or a 28-year-old who was a bartender until last year.”

The candidates who have upset the Democratic field this year come with a diversity of life experience that includes losing children to gun violence, undergoing gender reassignment surgery and escaping war-torn nations.
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez appeared in a campaign video called “The Courage to Change.” The video, posted in May, was one of Ms. Ocasio-Cortez’s most popular political tools.CreditAlexandria Ocasio-Cortez
Image
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez appeared in a campaign video called “The Courage to Change.” The video, posted in May, was one of Ms. Ocasio-Cortez’s most popular political tools.CreditAlexandria Ocasio-Cortez

The use of viral videos by first-time candidates to challenge assumptions around who should run for office was used early on by Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, the 28-year-old New Yorker who upset a powerful incumbent congressman in a Democratic primary this summer. It was one of the first races in this election season to signal the disconnect many liberals feel from their leaders.

“Women like me aren’t supposed to run for office,” Ms. Ocasio-Cortez, a former bartender, says in the opening of one of her most popular videos, “The Courage to Change,” which depicts her in settings that people from New York would find familiar: on a subway platform changing from flats into a pair of heels; eating dinner on the couch; picking up items in a bodega.
Naomi Burton and Nick Hayes, the duo behind Means of Production, work from their office in Detroit, Mich., in August.CreditEmily Rose Bennett for The New York Times
Image
Naomi Burton and Nick Hayes, the duo behind Means of Production, work from their office in Detroit, Mich., in August.CreditEmily Rose Bennett for The New York Times

Ms. Ocasio-Cortez’s video came out of a three-person firm called Means of Production in Detroit. Its producers were galvanized by frustration at Democrats after the 2016 election and wanted to shift their know-how in advertising and public relations into creating “propaganda for the working class,” said Nick Hayes, 21, one of the firm’s founders. Mr. Hayes was producing ads for carmakers and foam cup sellers before he met Naomi Burton, 29, at their local Democratic Socialists of America meeting. They founded the company together.

M. J. Hegar, a Democratic congressional candidate in Texas, has garnered millions of views for her three-and-a-half minute video, “Doors,” in which she describes fighting wildfires in California, being awarded a Purple Heart, suing the Pentagon over its ban on women in ground combat and watching her father toss her mother through a glass door. The video, produced by Putnam Partners in Washington and set to a Rolling Stones-like soundtrack, feels like a short biographical film.

It was expensive to produce at $50,000, but ended up being a fantastic gamble. It helped her campaign raise $1 million as viewers were drawn to her heroism and a compelling depiction of someone “who bumped up against the system and changed it for the better,” said Cayce McCabe, a senior vice president at Putnam Partners.
MJ Hegar, a Democratic candidate for Congress in Texas, showed her tattoo in a highly personal campaign ad called “Covered.”CreditMJ Hegar for Texas
Image
MJ Hegar, a Democratic candidate for Congress in Texas, showed her tattoo in a highly personal campaign ad called “Covered.”CreditMJ Hegar for Texas

People also took notice because Ms. Hegar did not look anything like the pearl-wearing politicians that play to part. In the opening shot of her and her family sitting down for a meal, the viewer sees a tattoo peeking out from under the sleeve on her right arm.

In her newest video, Ms. Hegar is shown inside a tattoo parlor. As she presents her arm to the camera and reveals a design with flowers and tree branches she explains why it’s there: It covers up the scars from the combat injuries she sustained as a helicopter pilot in Afghanistan.

“A lot of Democrats, for years, have been supporting and voting for candidates who didn’t always say exactly what they believed, didn’t always show their authentic, true selves,” said Mr. Goff, the Democratic consultant.

“To look around, not just at Trump, but at who’s been winning elections,” he said, “a lot of us have started to think: Why don’t we say what we mean?”
